in a joint statement the leaders of the
United States Egypt and Qatar are
calling on Israel and Hamas to enter
ceasefire talks next week in Doha or
Cairo and to get the job done no more
delays no more excuses they say this
could be their final offer to mediate an
end to the war and to bring Israeli
hostages home patience and time are in
short supply on Friday Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said that
he'll send negotiators to the talks the
top negotiator for
well he was killed Last Week Tonight no
word on who Hamas plans to send in his
place or if they plan to send anyone at
all I'm Brent G in Berlin this is the
day we begin the day with a major push
to deescalate in the Middle East when
seemingly all signs are pointing in the
other direction in the last week there
have been two assassinations a Hezbollah
commander in Lebanon and the leader of
Hamas in tyan Iran blames Israel has
vowed to retaliate putting the entire
region on edge now in this Powder Keg A
Renewed call for an end to fighting
between Israel and Hamas in Gaza this
week the leaders of the United States
Egypt and Qatar issued a joint statement
as mediators making perhaps their final
offer they called on both Israel and
Hamas to restart ceasefire talks next
week saying there is no further time to
waste nor excuses from any party for
further delay it is time to release the
hostages begin the ceasefire and
implement this
agreement today the Israeli Prime
Minister said that he will send
negotiators to ceasefire talks next week
no word from Hamas its main negotiator
and leader was killed last week but the
US says that should not stand in the way
of ending the fighting in Gaza take a
listen look I'm uh not going to
negotiate in public at all
um but I will say one thing that was
true before the death of Hana and
remains true today is that senoir was
ultimately the decider when it comes to
questions on these talks and so whether
he is sending messages directly or
sending messages through iMed
intermediaries he has always been the
person who would decide whether Hamas
agreed to a cease fire or not and under
what conditions they would agree to a
cease fire so uh we don't believe that
that has changed all right that's the
word from the US state department here
in the studio with me now is our Middle
East analyst shaie rosanis here on a
busy Friday evening shaie it's good to
see you hi the US state department says
that we don't believe anything has
changed when it comes to um who within
Hamas calls the the shots is that the
position of Israel as well yes well they
they always thought you know sinir the
one in Gaza is the one calling the shots
and they were also acting a seem
seemingly under this presumption when
they chose to go ahead um with the
assassination of an
presumably Israel is behind that so um
the assumption is that has not changed
if anything netan keeps you know um
saying that it's actually only pushing
down on Hamas isolating hania uh sorry
isolating inir in Gaza that's what will
bring you know uh Hamas to realize that
they need to compromise and that will
bring some sort of a breakthrough in the
talks um the fact of what's happening is
that sinir in Gaza is consolidating
power he's the you know hania was
somewhat of a position they were not on
best terms um there was a possibility
because hania was living in Qatar for
Qatar to have leverage on Ania to have
some more you know to work with and now
it's all in the hands of one hand
basically dug down under the tunnels of
the of Gaza and when we look at what is
going on right now um Israel is bracing
for a retaliatory attack by Iran
possibly also by Hezbollah Hamas is not
defeated the war in Gaza rages on and
now we've got the leaders of the US
Egypt and Qatar
saying no more excuses make this deal in
Gaza happen happen next week why the
sudden push now well it's not that
sudden push actually what the Americans
Qatari and Egyptian think is that they
actually have a gift of this week that
came you know all of a sudden uh to to
to their hands because soon after these
assassinations there was a feeling okay
this the whole region is going out of
spiring this is Ping and we're losing
control of what's Happening seeing
Lebanon and Iran take their time made
them realize okay maybe there was a way
in us for us now and it's all
intertwined in the sense that um
everybody's waiting to see what the else
this the other one is doing you know
Israel says we will go for the ceasefire
as long as there's no escalation in the
north the Iranians say we will maybe
consider the nature of our response if
we see some ceasefire happening Lebanese
are not too keen on immediately going
all in on Israel and it seems like even
Hamas that was hoping or it seemed like
you know a few days ago that they're
finally getting the you know what they
wanted you know Israel fighting as many
fronts as possible they realize maybe
this is not happening as well so easily
so might they might be you know more
incentivized in going for a ceasefire
but this is exactly what the um the uh
the mediators want to do they want to
you know tell the size basically this is
now a crossroad a critical Crossroad
here we're either going to a deal to a
ceasefire to deescalation or things
might get out of hand very fast yeah the
mediators here um in their joint
statement the leaders of the US Egypt
and Qatar right that this could be their
final offer they are
mediators they sound like they're
running out of patience and time well
the Americans definitely they have no
appetite for this you know uh they're
focusing on one thing and that is
November the election in America and
know Biden even though he can step back
from the race he knows you know he has
very little time still in office and
this would be for his legacy one of the
most important things he want to wrap it
up and he also has personal connection
to the topic you see how he talks about
the hostages how much effort his him
personally you know he met with families
he sees them it's it's a goal very dear
to his heart do you think his decision
the not to seek reelection is playing in
to to the speed of events that we're
seeing definely he knows he doesn't have
too much time he knows um he has very
little leverage that he can you know use
against Netanyahu and more than that
everybody you speak to when it comes to
the Israeli uh you know Israel is trying
to watch the condition of the hostages
the little that they do know about them
they say we are playing against time
those people that are there for almost
308 days now they don't have time um you
know they're they're losing you
know I mean of course the conditions
they're in you know we we know more and
more of them are are probably not with
us anymore and the longer we wait uh the
the bigger the CH size we only be bring
bringing back coffins sadly Netanyahu
was quick to agree to send the negoti
negotiators um next week it makes him
look like he's um a natural participant
in peace well Nano is important for him
to to
seemingly you know be interested in a
deal and he's been keeping up this um
you know line of I am all for it for it
you know for at least two months you
know it's been Joe Biden has presented
this deal to the world already at the
beginning of June and nothing has
actually substantially changed since if
any if you listen to uh high ranking
officials in the Israeli defense
Ministry and uh other services they say
they feel nany is actually trying to
keep more and more hurdles kind of
trying to change withdraw some of his
consent to you know certain parts of the
deal while at the same time promising to
the world to the families to Biden oh
I'm all in so this is a rift growing
between netan and the people running the
war and the more professional side on
the defense levels and you know there's
also this distrust that is you know
growing within the Israeli public and of
course the families of the hostages who
are very much afraid that Netanyahu is
led by political needs and not much by
uh the need to bring back the hostages
are you surprised that we haven't seen
Iran retaliate
already I mean is is there the sense in
Israel that Iran is being sucked into
the Palestinian cause more than so than
it wants to be for for a while it it
felt like you know we were on the verge
of this is actually happening this is
going to be a origional war with Iran is
stepping directly in what we've you know
the restraint that we've seen seen so
far and let's make sure that we we put
an emphasis on the so far part in this
um maybe hinting to us that you know
even October 7th we know was not
coordinated with the Iranians they did
not know it's about to be launched at
that specific date I'm not sure how much
they were in the in and outs of the
whole plan and and they've been trying
to show solidarity same with hasbalah
they've been trying to show solidarity
with the Palestinians but at the same
time keep it at an arms length you know
being able to focus on their interests
and and this happened Dr as at the
inauguration of a new president his
agenda had the the sanctions the the you
know the nuclear arms many other things
uh ahead before fighting the fights of
the Palestinians being sucked into that
War uh will divert attention and might
be very consequential for the Iranians
yes let me ask you I got 30 seconds here
the Israeli hostages you brought those
up earlier are these talks next week the
the final chance to bring those who are
still alive to bring them home some
people will say there are uh let's keep
in mind uh Thursday is a long time in
the Middle East uh we will have to see
if there's any escalation if we will see
uh High tensions uh flaming up in the
north it could be that this not going to
make any progress and this could be
maybe the last chance yeah we'll see
what happens next week that's for sure
shie good to have you in the studio
thank you for coming in on Friday night
thank
you Israel has confirmed that it will
send negotiators to GZA peace talks next
week in either Doha or Cairo prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu says that he
has agreed to the talks at the request
of international mediators world leaders
are pushing for talks to restart Hamas
however has yet to respond the recent
assassination of a Hamas leader in tyan
widely blamed on Israel has raised
tensions and some fear the operation has
hindered peace efforts Hamas was behind
the October 7th attacks on Israel it is
regarded by many countries as a
terrorist organization
Aaron David Miller is a senior fellow at
the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace he focuses on US foreign policy
and the Middle East and he joins me now
Mr Miller it's good to have you with us
on this Friday evening um we've heard it
before that that hopes of reaching a a
ceasefire deal have been revived we're
hearing it again now or at least that's
what's being implied with this joint
statement that was released yesterday is
it different this
time it may be you know based on my
experience 20 plus years and being
involved in Arab Israeli negotiations
Israeli Palestinian negotiations as well
they seem to have two speeds traditional
NE negotiations slow and slower th this
is not a traditional negotiation the
primary Palestinian decision makers in
sconed meters below ground in unit Rafa
probably surrounded by the remaining
hostages those dead and U and those that
are still alive live so the real
question is the Biden Administration the
International Community much of the Arab
world um the United Nations everybody's
in a hurry to reach a a ceasefire deal
between Israel andas the real question
which is impossible to answer is whether
Benjamin netan and yah senoir the
principal decision maker recently
elevated to become the political head of
Hamas not that he was anything other
than that uh making de critical
decisions from Gaza before it really
rests for their calculations and it may
well be that for any number of reasons
there's a better chance than ever uh
that you could get an agreement at least
to get through phase one why do you say
that you know I think um time uh and
pressure on both parties uh it's clear
uh CIA Bill Chief Bill Bill Burns
confirmed a month or so ago that hamas's
commanders are under pressure from an
unrelenting Israeli campaign uh senoir
must pay some attention to the
devastation and humanitarian catastrophe
that he has caused for the 2.3 million
people of Gaza as far as Mr neto's
concern uh the knesset is in recess it's
almost impossible to bring down an
Israeli government during that period if
he wants to do the deal um he's more
he's more or less immunized from
pressure from his two extremist
ministers so as I mentioned I think
there's a real possibility of an
agreement but only to take us through
phase one which is essentially limited
exchange of hostages roughly 30 alive
and dead in exchange for an asymmetrical
number of Palestinian prisoners maybe 50
Palestinian prisoners for each Israeli a
six a six we cease fire and if you could
get that maybe and I I'll stress very
cautiously and so really maybe you could
think about getting to a cessation of
hostilities permanent cessation of
hostilities but that's going to be a
very heavy lift I heard today from
several analysts that netanyahu's
motivation here is simply um I will go
with the good Optics I will send
negotiators to these talks next week we
will agree to what's on the table it's
been on the table since May anyway and
as you say after the first phases over
then Israeli troops can go right back
into the campaign to destroy Hamas in
Gaza do you is that what how you see it
well I mean that's how I see it in large
part because and again it's not oneand
clamping Hamas is a key player in this
obviously I just don't see anyone that
yaka sinir will give up the 50 remaining
hostages that he could that he'll hold
that is the male uh IDF and civilians
that he holds for anything other than a
complete cessation of hostilities and as
long as Yahya sinir is the leader of
Hamas and Hamas appears to be a viable
organization there is no way Benjamin
Netanyahu is going to agree to a
permanent cessation of hostilities their
end games are mutually irreconcilable
and that's the problem we're going to
face there is no strategic solution to
Goa we didn't even talk about the the
emerging escalation that we may face on
the Israeli lebanes border any day now
yeah which is going to have an impact on
what's planned for next Thursday in
either Doha or or kaido yeah we will
definitely be watching events next week
and as you say um yeah it is a powder
KAG every day can change Mr Miller it's
good to have you on the show Good to get
your analysis tonight thank you
thanks for having
me as the families of Israeli hostages
wait for their loved ones to be freed
the people of Gaza are also desperate
for the fighting to end the Hamas run
Health Ministry there says that almost
40,000 people have been killed in the
war in
Gaza 10 months into Israel's war with
Hamas thousands of gazans are again
forced to
flee many have moved multiple times to
escape the
fighting now they're leaving Han Yunis
as Israel steps up its attacks once
[Music]
again there's no safe area I'm telling
you we cannot find a place to stay we
are thrown in the streets and calling on
them calling on them to see us because
we are tired by God we are tired by God
we are tired
it's not just Israel's attacks that
shatter any sense of
security a lack of food clean water and
basic supplies means it's a daily
struggle to
survive we are tired of this life by God
death is better than this let the
country see our situation and find a
solution we are tired we've died 100
times Israeli attacks have heard two
schools in Gaza City in recent days
gaza's Civil Defense Agency said more
than 18 people were killed the Israeli
military said it struck Hamas command
centers well I'm joined Now by
journalist B slad he's in Tel Aviv this
evening B let me ask you the the
mediators here the United States Egypt
and Qatar they say that they only need
to work out the details of
implementation of a SE fire that Israel
and Hamas need to just get the details
out of the way um what are the sticking
points for
Israel well the sticking points are the
same basically the four points that
Netanyahu designated as his red lines uh
first of all the Israeli presence in the
Philadelphia Corridor the uh border
between isra between excuse me Egypt and
the Gaza Strip in which Israel believes
that Hamas smuggles through the tunnels
there their weaponry and that's what we
are seeing every day by the IDF that
exposes more and more tunnels in that
area so Israel wants to have a presence
there uh that's first the second point
is the fact that Israel doesn't want any
uh person who is armed uh to go back to
the north of the Gaza Strip the area
that Israel wants to keep as free of any
of the Armed groups in the Gaza trip and
maybe the most important disagreement
that has no solution yet and I don't
think that there will be any solution of
it that Israel wants to uh resume the
war after the beginning of after the end
of the first phase of the uh um the deal
and Hamas of course they want Israel to
declare that they are stopping the war
so they can guarantee for themselves
that they keep their position in the
Gaza Strip and the day after what is
your sense um is Netanyahu is he sending
negotiators in good faith to these talks
is he willing to sign on to a ceasefire
agreement if the sticking points are
clarified or is this just more window
dressing or buying time for a leader who
wants to you know stay in
power well um there is political uh um
incentive for every every politician out
there but uh when Netanyahu send this
delegation I don't think that anyone in
Israel thinks that we are getting closer
to a deal basically a source in Israel
said today that uh uh the disagreements
are still very wide and uh uh the uh
expectation should be limited that
nothing will actually it changed yya
sinar's position and specifically
talking about yya Sinar who became right
now the also the political leader of the
Hamas movement uh the belief in Israel
that he does want to deal right now
because of the regional escalation
because he wants a regional War at least
some escalation that can be a benefiting
for him uh for uh the ultimate goal of
destroying Israel or at least the
continuation of this um ongoing uh um
not exactly War but the whole situation
between Israel and hisbah and Iran and
the other
broes okay but we will certainly be
following developments as we know you
will as well journalist baladin in telis
tonight Bing thank
you thank you